# MODEL7888000034: vempati_model_2007

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL7888000034.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL7888000034.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


This is the model described in the article:  
**A biochemical model of matrix metalloproteinase 9 activation and inhibition.**   
Vempati P, Karagiannis ED, Popel AS. _J Biol Chem._ 2007 Dec
28;282(52):37585-96. Pubmed ID:
[17848556](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17848556) , doi:
[10.1074/jbc.M611500200](http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M611500200) .  
**Abstract:**   
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a class of extracellular and membrane-
bound proteases involved in an array of physiological processes, including
angiogenesis. We present a detailed computational model of MMP9 activation and
inhibition. Our model is validated to existing biochemical experimental data.
We determine kinetic rate constants for the processes of MMP9 activation by
MMP3, MMP10, MMP13, and trypsin; inhibition by the tissue inhibitors of
metalloproteinases (TIMPs) 1 and 2; and MMP9 deactivation. This computational
approach allows us to investigate discrepancies in our understanding of the
interaction of MMP9 with TIMP1. Specifically, we find that inhibition due to a
single binding event cannot describe MMP9 inhibition by TIMP1. Temporally
accurate biphasic inhibition requires either an additional isomerization step
or a second lower affinity isoform of MMP9. We also theoretically characterize
the MMP3/TIMP2/pro-MMP9 and MMP3/TIMP1/pro-MMP9 systems. We speculate that
these systems differ significantly in their time scales of activation and
inhibition such that MMP9 is able to temporarily overshoot its final
equilibrium value in the latter. Our numerical simulations suggest that the
ability of pro-MMP9 to complex TIMP1 increases this overshoot. In all, our
analysis serves as a summary of existing kinetic data for MMP9 and a
foundation for future models utilizing MMP9 or other MMPs under
physiologically well defined microenvironments.

This model was taken from the [CellML
repository](http://www.cellml.org/models) and automatically converted to SBML.  
The original model is: [ **Vempati, Karagiannis, Popel, 2007 version 1**
](http://www.cellml.org/models/vempati_karagiannis_popel_2007_version01)  
The original CellML model was created and curated by:  
**Catherine May Lloyd**   
c.lloyd(at)auckland.ac.nz  
The University of Auckland, Bioengineering Institute

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2011 The BioModels.net Team.  
To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

In summary, you are entitled to use this encoded model in absolutely any
manner you deem suitable, verbatim, or with modification, alone or embedded it
in a larger context, redistribute it, commercially or not, in a restricted way
or not..  
  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Nov√®re N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)


